parameter specification/type variable tuple variance (#2215)
python/typing: docs/spec/generics.rst

Reviewer: This seems perhaps out of place in the typing spec? Unless it is trying to say that type checkers should also model the presence of this `__infer_variance__` attribute and its value? If we keep it, we should update it to mention when this attribute was added to `TypeVarTuple` and `ParamSpec` at runtime. But I'd be inclined to just remove it.

   P = ParamSpec("WrongName") # Rejected because P =/= WrongName

The runtime should accept ``bound``\ s and ``covariant`` and ``contravariant``
arguments in the declaration just as ``typing.TypeVar`` does, but for ``bound`` we

> will defer the standardization of the semantics of this option to a later PEP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arguments in the declaration just as ``typing.TypeVar`` does.

We defer the standardization of the semantics of the ``bound`` option to a later PEP.
```

For each type parameter in a generic class:

1. If the type parameter comes from a traditional
``TypeVar``/``TypeVarTuple``/``ParamSpec`` declaration and is not specified

> as ``infer_variance`` (see below), its variance is specified by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``TypeVar``/``TypeVarTuple``/``ParamSpec`` declaration and is not constructed
with ``infer_variance=True`` (see below), its variance is specified by the
```

constructor call. No further inference is needed.

2. Create two specialized versions of the class. We'll refer to these as
``upper`` and ``lower`` specializations. In both of these specializations,
replace all type parameters other than the one being inferred by a dummy type
instance (a concrete anonymous class that is assumed to meet the bounds or
constraints of the type parameter). In the ``upper`` specialized class,
specialize the target type parameter with:

 an ``object`` instance for a type variable.
 a ``*tuple[object, ...]`` value for a type variable tuple.

>  a ``...`` value for a parameter specification.

Reviewer: I don't think using `...` here is sound. Because it is both assignable-to and assignable-from any paramspec, it means that a case like the `ContravariantParamSpec` test will wrongly infer the paramspec as covariant (because `lower` is assignable to `upper`) before it even checks the contravariant direction.

I don't think there is any way to make the variance-inference algorithm described here correct and support inference of ParamSpec variance, without introducing the new concept of a "top signature".

(I'm also not sure how much value there is in including this particular variance-inference algorithm in the spec. I think it describes pyright's algorithm. I know that ty and pyrefly do not use this algorithm. I don't know about mypy or zuban.)

Author: > (I'm also not sure how much value there is in including this particular variance-inference algorithm in the spec. I think it describes pyright's algorithm. I know that ty and pyrefly do not use this algorithm. I don't know about mypy or zuban.)

i agree, but i think this point is out of the scope of this change

Reviewer 2: We need to describe the algorithm somehow, don't we? Other type checkers use a different algorithm in practice, but to be conformant they need to follow an algorithm that has the same results as that described in the spec.

Reviewer: Depending on the situation I think it can be fine (or preferable) for the spec to describe the required results without specifying a particular algorithm to reach them. In this case I'm not sure that would be any simpler (and in any case I don't think we should remove this algorithm in this PR.)

I think for this PR we can fairly simply describe the nature of the top signature (the union of all possible callable signatures) without having to go too deep into it.

Author: i removed the `...`

For each type parameter in a generic class:

1. If the type parameter comes from a traditional

> ``TypeVar``/``TypeVarTuple``/``ParamSpec`` declaration and is not constructed

Reviewer: What happens to existing callback protocols that use a legacy `ParamSpec` without explicit variance? We already have this accepted conformance case in `protocols_variance.py`:

```python
P = ParamSpec("P")
R = TypeVar("R", covariant=True)

class Callback(Protocol[P, R]):  # OK
    def __call__(self, *args: P.args, **kwargs: P.kwargs) -> R: ...
```

Under this rule, `P` is invariant by default, but it is used contravariantly here, and the protocol spec says this should be an error (declared variance must match usage). Mypy currently exempts `ParamSpec` and `TypeVarTuple` from that check specifically because their variance was previously unspecified.

I think we should update that `protocols_variance.py` conformance test to declare `P` as contravariant.

I'm not sure if we need to do something about the backwards-incompatibility. I guess we can leave it up to type-checkers how to handle this.

Author: good point, i agree with you. in my opinion this notion of variance matching on protocols is more like a lint rule, so i see no great need to enforce the behaviour here

> with ``infer_variance=True`` (see below), its variance is specified by the

Reviewer: This now specifies `infer_variance=True` for traditional `ParamSpec` and `TypeVarTuple`, but the "Auto Variance For TypeVar" section below still only describes `TypeVar`, and neither new conformance file tests this case. Could we update that section and cover inferred legacy variance for both constructors, including rejection of `covariant=True, contravariant=True` and explicit variance combined with `infer_variance=True`?

> with ``infer_variance=True`` (see below), its variance is specified by the

Reviewer: This now specifies `infer_variance=True` for traditional `ParamSpec` and `TypeVarTuple`, but neither conformance file contains a successful declaration or assignments demonstrating inferred covariance and contravariance. Every existing use is marked `# E`, so a checker that rejects `infer_variance` as an unknown option can still appear to pass.

constructor call. No further inference is needed.

> 2. Create two specialized versions of the class. We'll refer to these as

Reviewer: What should the "dummy type instance" be when one of the other parameters is a `TypeVarTuple` or `ParamSpec`? An ordinary dummy class isn't a valid specialization for either kind. Could we spell out kind-compatible substitutions and cover a mixed example such as:

```python
class Mixed[T, *Ts, **P]:
    def f(self, x: T, /, *args: P.args, **kwargs: P.kwargs) -> tuple[*Ts]: ...
```

I would expect `T` and `P` to be contravariant and `Ts` to be covariant, independently.

> 2. Create two specialized versions of the class. We'll refer to these as

Reviewer: What should the dummy specialization be when one of the other parameters is a `TypeVarTuple` or `ParamSpec`? A concrete anonymous class is a valid dummy only for an ordinary `TypeVar`; it cannot stand in for a variadic pack or parameter signature. That means the algorithm as written here still cannot construct the specializations needed for the newly added `Mixed[T, *Ts, **P]` conformance example (which looks great). Could we spell out kind-compatible dummy substitutions for all three parameter kinds here?

``upper`` and ``lower`` specializations. In both of these specializations,
replace all type parameters other than the one being inferred by a dummy type
instance (a concrete anonymous class that is assumed to meet the bounds or
constraints of the type parameter). In the ``upper`` specialized class,
specialize the target type parameter with:

 an ``object`` instance for a type variable.
 a ``*tuple[object, ...]`` value for a type variable tuple.

>  a for a parameter specification, a 'top signature' value, i.e. a type

Reviewer 3: I assume `a for a` is not wanted? The whole paragraph feels a bit weird and the formatting might be a bit off.

Author: addressed points 1 and 3. do you have a suggestion on how to improve the wording?

Reviewer 3: I would probably go with a list here:

```suggestion
-  an ``object`` instance for a type variable
- a ``*tuple[object, ...]`` value for a type variable tuple
- a "top signature" value for a parameter specification, i.e. a type that represents the super type of every possible signature.
```

Author: done

> Auto Variance For TypeVar

Reviewer: We should update this header - either to mention all three, or remove the specific mention of `TypeVar`.
